ResearchGate
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317039893
Contact-induced grammatical change: A cautionary tale
Chapter • January 2010
CITATIONS READS
78 449
2 authors, including:
S * , * Shana Poplack
- U U University of Ottawa
122 PUBLICATIONS 7,570 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Shana Poplack on 25 June 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.Language and Space
An International Handbook of
Linguistic Variation
Volume 1: Theories and Methods
Edited by
Peter Auer and Jurgen Erich Schmidt
Offprint
Poplack, Shana & Levey, Stephen. 2010. Contact-induced grammatical change. In Auer,
Peter & Schmidt, Jurgen Erich (eds.), Language and Space - An international handbook of
linguistic variation: Volume 1 - Theories and methods. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 391-419.
De Gruyter MoutonPoplack & Levey 2010
IV. Structure and dynamics across language
spaces
22. Contact-induced grammatical change:
A cautionary tale
i. Introduction
2. Background
3. Establishing change
4. Applying the comparative variationist framework to the investigation of change
5. Putting contact-induced change to the test
6. Discussion
7. Acknowledgement
8. References
1. Introduction
When the space between two languages - or their speakers — is reduced enough to
result in contact, a variety of outcomes may ensue. Most prominent by far is change. So
ubiquitous has the association between contact and change become that it is invoked to
account for a wide array of developments that differ from some (typically ill-defined)
norm. This is the case even where the candidate development already exists in the recipient language, where no other-language form is visible, and where the transition period
is as short as a single generation. And despite the general consensus that grammatical
structure is particularly resistant to transfer, reports of dramatic structural changes in
languages known to have been in contact are legion.
In this article we suggest that much of the evidence brought to bear on contactinduced change - diachronic as well as synchronic - either fails to demonstrate that
change has occurred, and/or if it has, that it is the product of contact and not internal
evolution. These issues, together with the possibility that the inherent variability characteristic of all spoken language may have been mistaken for change, need to be resolved
before a contact explanation can be justified.
In the ensuing sections we first provide a brief overview of some of the more salient
types of change reported to result from contact. We then review the kinds of confounding evidence that plagues the study of change, contact-induced or otherwise, and propose
criteria for establishing its existence empirically. In section 3 we detail a method, combining the machinery of variationist sociolinguistics with the comparative method of historical linguistics, capable of identifying change and ascertaining its source. We then present
a series of case studies illustrating the utility of this approach and conclude with some
observations about the implications of our findings for understanding the existence, nature and extent of contact-induced change. Our locus is on the grammar, but the considerations we present also apply to other types of change, with the exception of lexical borrowing.Poplack & Levey 2010
392 IV, Structure and dynamics across language spaces
2. Background
Contact-induced structural change has long been a subject of debate among linguists,
due in no small part to the primacy traditionally accorded the internal evolution of
language (e.g.. Lass 1980; Martinet I960). This was traditionally assumed to be regular
and rule-governed, while externally-motivated changes could be arbitrary, unpredictable
and idiosyncratic. External explanations were thus often invoked as a last resort, when
a more satisfactory account was not available (Romaine 1988: 349).
Early opinions ranged from outright denial of the possibility of a mixed language
(e.g., Muller 1871: 86; Whitney 1881) to the claim that there are no completely unmi.xed
languages (Schuchardt 1884: 5). But most of those who admitted the possibility of contact-induced change did so cautiously and under specific conditions. Haugen’s comment
that “[on] those relatively rare occasions when bound morphemes are actually transferred from one language to another, they are such as fit readily into a preexistent category
in the recipient language” (1954: 386), is but one example. Similarly, Jakobson (1962:
241) argued that “a language accepts foreign structural elements only when they correspond to its own developmental tendencies”. Notwithstanding such caveats, major structural changes said to result from language contact continue to be reported.
Among the more spectacular changes of the past figure the borrowing of Turkish
inflectional suffixes into dialects of Asia Minor Greek (Dawkins 1916), the incorporation
of the entire Spanish preposition system into Malinche Mexicano (Field 2005: 352), the
borrowing of Russian finite verb morphology into Mednyj Aleut (Thomason 2001), the
development of Michif from French noun phrases and Cree verb phrases (e.g., Bakker
1997; Bakker and Papen 1997) and the (in)famous convergence of Kupwar Urdu, Marathi and Kannada into "a single surface syntactic structure” (Gumperz and Wilson
1971: 155).
After reviewing many such changes, as well as a variety of theories of what constrains
them, Thomason was led to reject the idea that categorical constraints against contactinduced change could be enunciated. Instead she proposed that under the right social
and linguistic conditions,
[...] anything goes, including structural borrowing that results in major typological changes
in the borrowing language. In phonology, loss or attrition of entire phonetic and/or phonological categories in native words and of all kinds of morphophonemic rules. In syntax,
sweeping changes in such features as word order, relative clauses, negation, coordination,
subordination, comparison, and quantification. In morphology, typologically disruptive
changes such as the replacement of flexional by agglutinative morphology or vice-versa, the
addition or loss of morphological categories that do not match in source and borrowing
languages, and the wholesale loss or addition of agreement patterns. (Thomason 2001: 71)
At the time of this writing, Thomason’s (and Schuchardt’s) views enjoy wide support.
The implicit assumption is that change is an almost inevitable result of language contact
(e.g., Appel and Muysken 1987: 154; Bynon 1977: 240; Harris and Campbell 1995: 149,
among many others; although see Thomason 2007 for discussion of deliberate resistance
to contact-induced change). To be sure, some scholars continue to caution against promiscuous inferences, particularly in the absence of robust sociohistorical and linguistic
evidence (e.g., Dorian 1993; Mougeon, Nadasdi and Rchner 2005). And Heine and Kuteva (2005: 8) observe that contact is often invoked without satisfactorily ruling outPoplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 393
other causal mechanisms. Nonetheless, the onus seems to be on the analyst to justify
why change did not occur in an apparently favorable situation:
But since [the above] predictions are robust - that is. they are valid in the great majority of
cases that have been described in the literature - any violation should provide interesting
insights into social, and. to a lesser extent, linguistic determinants of contact-induced
change. (Thomason 2001: 71. emphasis ours)
And in fact, the kinds of changes enumerated above are reported in contemporary contact situations as well. In the least conspicuous cases, an existing minor-use pattern is
claimed to be developing into a major-use pattern via overextension of recipient-language options into new contexts (e.g., Heine and Kuteva 2005: 44—62; Klein 1980; SilvaCorvalan 1994a: 167; Toribio 2004: 167). Thus Toribio (2004: 170) states that when the
“bilingual mode” of two Spanish-English bilinguals was experimentally induced, their
use of overt subject pronouns, while not ungrammatical in Spanish, reflected the influence of English, a non-pro-drop language. Savic (1995: 487, cited in Heine and Kuteva
2005: 69) reaches similar conclusions in relation to slightly elevated uses of optional
overt subject and object NPs in the discourse of Serbian-English bilinguals. Heine and
Kuteva also discuss an increase of overt pronouns among Russian and Hungarian bilinguals, again on the model of English (2005: 68), as do Otheguy, Zentella and Livert
(2007) for New York City Spanish and Backus (2005: 333) for Turkish. The same process
has been said to initiate word order changes, as in the shift from the Spanish majority
pattern of postposed adjectival placement (/« persona mas importante) to the pre-nominal
adjectival placement (/« mas importante persona) characteristic of English (Toribio
2004: 167).
In another type of change, recipient-language morphemes may encode a completely
new grammatical category, as in Tariana-Portuguesc bilinguals’ use of interrogative pronouns (e.g., kwana ‘who’) to mark relative and complement clauses on the model of
Portuguese, or of Portuguese lexemes to express the Tariana evidentially marking system (Aikhenvald 2002: 182-183, 315-316).
Other contemporary cases of convergence involve outright violation of recipient-language grammar. Clyne (2003: 132) discusses overgeneralization by Dutch-English and,
to a lesser extent, German-English bilinguals of SVO word order in contexts where SOV
and VSO are prescribed in the non-contact varieties.
Apart from extension of an existing option, addition of a totally new category and
violation of recipient-language rules, contact is widely believed to accelerate attrition
and loss of grammatical features in one language with no equivalent in the other (e.g.,
Seliger and Vago 1991). The subjunctive mood in New World Romance varieties is frequently cited as an example of contact-induced erosion (see e.g., Garcia 1985; Gutierrez
1994; Lantolf 1978; Ocampo 1990; Silva-Corvalan 1994b for Spanish and Laurier 1989
for Canadian French). We explore this phenomenon in more detail below. Other morphosyntactic elements said to be receding as a result of contact include the BE auxiliary
(sein. :ljn, esserc) in Australian German, Dutch and Italian respectively, in favor of
haben. hebben, avere ‘have’, on the model of English, which admits only have in such
contexts (Clyne 2003: 1 18- 119). Clyne does acknowledge regional variation in auxiliary
usage, even in some non-contact varieties of these languages, but follows Thomason and
Kaufman (1988: 58-59), in arguing that contact reinforces language-internal tendencies.
And these examples could be multiplied ad libitum.Poplack & Levey 2010
394 IV. Structure and dynamics across language spaces
Much of the evidence Гог contact-induced change may lend itself equally well to
alternate explanations. Sometimes inherent variability is equated with change (as in the
aforementioned Australian example). Elsewhere, perceived differences from a standard
are designated changes (as in the increase of overt subject pronouns). And it is often
unclear whether the change in question is idiosyncratic or community-wide. The next
section summarizes these and other pitfalls and details some of the considerations that
must be taken into account in the empirical establishment of change.
3. Establishing change
3.1. Variability is not change
The hallmark of speech is inherent variability, alternate ways of saying the same thing
(Labov 1969). Variability is a necessary condition Гог change, but is not, in and of itself,
coterminous with it. In many areas of the grammar, alternations among variant forms
may persist for centuries, but linguists who believe that language is invariant often interpret them as signs of change. This inference is particularly prevalent when the forms in
question are detected among speakers or groups considered vulnerable to external influence (e.g., bilinguals, residents of minority-language communities in intense contact with
a majority language, etc.). Change is also routinely invoked when one of the variants is
salient or stigmatized, especially when a null form is involved. Thus, the widespread
variability between subjunctive and indicative morphology in (prescribed) subjunctiveselecting contexts cited above is usually characterized in contact situations as loss of the
subjunctive, despite the fact that this alternation has been attested Гог centuries (Poplack
2003; St-Amand 2002). So a first requirement is to determine whether variability is involved in change. Variant choice is never random, but is instead highly constrained by
features of the (linguistic and extra-linguistic) environment. Measuring the trajectory of
variant use over time, coupled with analysis of the fine conditioning of variant choice,
provide a sensitive and refined diagnostic of change, in ways we illustrate in section
5 below.
3.2. Locating an earlier stage
At the most trivial level, change shows up as a difference (qualitative or quantitative)
between an outcome and an earlier stage, but in much of the current literature, the
structure of the earlier stage is either not appealed to, or at best, only inferred (e.g.,
Winford 2003: 64). Absent systematic comparison with a relevant precursor, any claims
about what has changed must remain speculative. (Indeed, lack of an appropriate diachronic baseline is at least partially responsible Гог the widespread assumption that many
salient features of contemporary vernaculars, both contact and non-contact, are recent
innovations; see also Zwicky 2005).
The first step in establishing the existence of change is comparison over time. This
may not be simple or straightforward, given the often fragmentary nature of surviving
diachronic evidence. This abiding (and at times insoluble) problem in historical linguisPoplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 395
tics has given rise to an entire methodology devoted to reconstruction (e.g., Campbell
1999, 2003; Hoenigswald I960; Lehman 1992; Ringe 2003, to name but a few). Synchronically, however, with a modicum of ingenuity, earlier stages or surrogates for them
can often be found.
3.3. The nature of the reference point
Not every earlier stage is equally useful in assessing change, however. In most reported
cases, the comparison point (diachronic or synchronic) is some poorly defined “standard”. Constituted only of forms that have been prescriptively ratified, the standard
rarely acknowledges variants that cannot be associated (rightly or wrongly) with variant
functions or readings (Poplack et al. 2002). As a result, the language ratified as standard
may diverge considerably from the language actually spoken, which often develops independently of normative injunction (Poplack and Dion to appear; Leroux 2003; Poplack
and Malvar 2007; Willis 2000). The variability most characteristic of vernacular speech
involves competition among standard and nonstandard features. When compared with
an idealized invariant standard, the latter may appear to be changes.
A nice illustration of the importance of an appropriate reference, or baseline, variety
comes from a recent study of Spanish in contact with English in New York City
(Otheguy, Zentella and Livert 2007). As noted above in connection with the extension of
minor-use patterns, rates of overt pronouns are thought to be increasing among secondgeneration Spanish speakers, on the model of English, in which the subject is assumed
to be categorically expressed (but see Leroux and Jarmasz [2006] for conditions governing variable subject pro-drop in English). Of course, some overt pronoun expression is
tolerated in Spanish, but the standard baseline does not specify how much. What then
constitutes an “increase”? Vis-a-vis what? Otheguy, Zentella and Livert’s comparison
with one surrogate pre-contact stage of Spanish (spoken by newcomers to New York)
revealed, contrary to the widely espoused convergence hypothesis enunciated above, an
even higher rate of overt pronouns than that displayed by their New York born-andraised counterparts (2007; 786). Only once the appropriate comparison variety was identified (i. e. by distinguishing two newcomer dialects, each with a different initial rate of
overt pronouns), were they able to demonstrate that pronoun expression had in fact
increased in the second generation.
Invidious comparisons can only be avoided if the reference variety is commensurate
with the variety hosting the candidate for change. If it is a spoken vernacular, the baseline should also be a spoken vernacular (or an appropriate surrogate thereof); if it is a
contact variety, the baseline should be a pre-contact variety, and so on. As we will show
below, when the inference of change is pursued scientifically via systematic comparisons
(vertical and horizontal) of appropriate reference varieties, potential candidates often
turn out either not to be changes, or not to be contact-induced, but rather cases of
garden-variety inherent variability firmly rooted in the internal structure of language
(Leroux and Jarmasz 2006; Poplack et al. 2006). Efforts invested in locating and mining
appropriate earlier stages have paid off handsomely (Ayres-Bennett 2000; Gordon et al.
2004; Martineau and Mougeon 2003; Poplack and St-Amand 2007). The procedure is a
good deal more laborious than simply inferring what the precursor was like, but in view
of the potential for misidentification, we see this as a requirement for any claim of
change based on synchronic data.Poplack & Levey 2010
396 IV. Structure and dynamics across language spaces
3.4. The social embedding of change
Another major impediment to detecting change resides in the nature, quantity and quality of the evidence. Manifestations of change are relatively rare in running discourse.
This may be why much of the published evidence comes from data collected in experimental or quasi-experimental conditions (e.g.. informant elicitation, subjective reaction
tests, even “forced" interviews with semi-speakers [see, e.g., Altenberg 1991; Huffines
1991; Kaufman and Aronoff 1991; Montrul 2002; Schmidt 1991]). Atypical situations
may entail atypical behavior, with little or no bearing on what transpires in real-life
bilingual settings (Poplack 1983: 116). Without knowing how well, if at all, these experiments reflect language use in the community, their results cannot be interpreted.
This brings us to the distinction between innovation and change. Every change involves an innovation in the speech of one or more individuals and its subsequent diffusion across the rest of the community (Croft 2000; Joseph and Janda 2003; 13; Milroy
1993; 223; Shapiro 1995: 105, fn. 1; Thomason 2007). For some linguists, the innovation
is the change, and it is assumed to occur during first language acquisition. Theoretically,
we would argue (along with Labov 1994; 310 — 311 and most other sociolinguists), that
“an innovation in a speaker’s output is not a linguistic change until it has been agreed
on and adopted by some community of speakers” (Milroy 1992; 221), afortiori because
the vast majority of changes do not “catch on” (e.g., Thomason 2001: 130). From an
empirical perspective, however, this is a moot point: in all but the rarest of cases, the
moment of innovation is simply unobservable.
We can rephrase the issue in terms of the relationship between the individual and the
community. Claims of change are often based on exiguous speaker samples (e.g., Toribio’s 2004 study of two individuals), if any. The linguistic behavior of the individual may
be ephemeral, situation-bound and/or simply deviant from the norms of the remainder
of the community (Labov 1972a; Poplack 1983: 1 19), especially when this behavior is
elicited under laboratory conditions. Alternatively, it may be a predictable outcome of
one or more explanatory factors, linguistic and/or extra-linguistic. Only once the speaker’s linguistic behavior is situated with respect to that of the appropriate reference variety
(other speakers of the same age, bilingual ability, educational level, etc.) is it possible to
decide. If change has occurred, it should be observable (at least to some degree) in the
speech of the relevant members of the community (e.g., the younger cohort, if spearheaded by youth; the highly bilingual, if induced by contact, etc.). In other words, in
the absence of diffusion, change cannot be confirmed.
3.5. Type of bilingual population
The locus of the candidate for contact-induced change is also important. As Bullock and
Toribio (2004: 91) observe, researchers have drawn on an array of bilingual populations,
including heritage language speakers, incomplete acquirers and those undergoing language loss. Shifting populations have garnered most attention (see, e.g., Dorian 1981,
1989; Gal 1979; Mougeon and Beniak 1991; Otheguy, Zentella and Liven 2007; SilvaCorvalan 1991), but the linguistic behavior they display is not necessarily applicable to
stable bilingual communities (Poplack 1993; Winford 2003: 64). In the widely studiedPoplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 397
contexts of language restriction and obsolescence, structural differences (from the mainstream or non-contact variety) may in fact be inevitable, given that many of the informants may not (or no longer) use it with any regularity. In effect, then, although ethnically minority-group members, they may be L2 speakers of the minority language
(Poplack 1997: 305). L2 speakers can expected to make all manner of acquisition errors,
depending on their level of proficiency at the time of data collection. Though these may
be transitory, in contact situations, they too are often construed as changes.
3.6. The linguistic embedding of change
In addition to a certain level of diffusion across the community, the innovation should
also occur (to some degree) in relevant linguistic contexts. Relevant contexts are determined by situating the innovation in the larger host linguistic system-synchronic and
diachronic. Among the questions to be answered are: To what extent has the innovation
gained a foothold? What is its current role? Has it replaced a native form in one or more
functions? Did it introduce a new function into recipient-language grammar? Isolated,
anecdotal or exceptional examples, so often cited in the literature, reveal nothing about
the regularity of the innovation, its productivity, or the extent to which it is entrenched
in the language (Weinreich, Labov and Herzog 1968: 185). This can only come from
studying the sustained discourse of speakers in context. Because changes examined synchronically are likely to still be in progress, and thus continue to feature variability, these
questions can only be addressed by establishing the structure of the variability, as it
emerges from the constraints conditioning variant choice.
3.7. Recognizing change
Most reported changes are tangible: a novel lexical element (e.g_, a borrowing), unwarranted presence of an existing form (e.g., increased pronoun expression in pro-drop
languages), absence of a prescribed form (e.g., the French subjunctive), or choice of the
(prescriptively) “wrong” form (e.g., auxiliary haben for sein in Australian German or
avoir for elre in Canadian French). But observed changes tend to be far more subtle,
especially during the sometimes very lengthy transition period from one language state
to another. Linguists who focus on inherent variability recognize, in ascending order of
importance, change in frequency of one or more competing forms, change in statistical
significance of one or more factors contributing to variant choice and change in linguistic
structure. With rare exceptions, these elude casual observation, but can be detected with
the aid of the methods described in section 4.
3.8. Distinguishing contact-induced change from internal evolution
Once it has been established that a change has indeed taken place, it remains to demonstrate that it is contact-induced and not the product of drift. This step is usually skipped
in the literature, much of which is predicated on the aforementioned (widespread butPoplack & Levey 2010
398 IV, Structure and dynamics across language spaces
unfounded) assumption that linguistic differences occurring in bilingual contexts are necessarily I) changes and 2) contact-induced. Thomason (2007: 42) defines contact-induced
change as follows: “a particular linguistic change is caused at least in part by language
(or dialect) contact if it would have been less likely to occur outside a particular contact
situation”. Given how little we know about the likelihood of particular changes — within
or outside contact situations — we offer alternative criteria:
A candidate for contact-induced change in a contact variety is present in the presumed
source variety and either I) absent in the pre-contact or non-contact variety, or 2) if present
(e.g., through interlingual coincidence), is not conditioned in the same way as in the source,
and 3) can also be shown to parallel in some non-trivial way the behavior of a counterpart
feature in the source.
Compliance with these conditions can only be ascertained through systematic quantitative comparisons, of a diagnostic linguistic feature, with an earlier or pre-contact stage
(or a surrogate thereof), with a non-contact variety, and most important, with the presumed source. As we shall see in what follows, these criteria have not been met by most
extant studies, with the result that the existence, frequency and extent of contact-induced
change remain unclear.
Summarizing, sufficient understanding of the outcomes of contact appears beyond
the reach of anything but systematic corpus-based research carried out within the bilingual community. Application of an empirically accountable quantitative methodology to
large and representative bodies of bilingual speech can contribute significantly to resolving the difficulties associated with ascertaining whether contact-induced change has authentically occurred. It is to such a methodological framework that we now turn.
4. Applying the comparative variationist framework
to the investigation of change
4.1. The variationist paradigm
The approach that we exemplify in the remainder of this article draws on the combined
resources of variationist sociolinguistics (e.g., Labov 1972a, Labov 1972b; Labov et al.
1968; Weinreich, Labov and Herzog 1968) and the Comparative Method of historical
linguistics (e.g., Baldi 1990; Campbell 1998; Hoenigswald I960; Meillet 1967). A central
tenet of the variationist paradigm is that the recurrent choices made by speakers in
discourse, though not completely predictable, are not random, but are subject to constraints imposed by “the phonological environment, the syntactic context, the discursive
function of the utterance, topic, style, situation and personal and/or sociodemographic
characteristics of the speaker or other participants” (Sankoff 1988a: 151). The key theoretical construct of this framework is the linguistic variable (Labov 1966/1982), which
comprises a set of variants among which speakers alternate in expressing a given meaning
or function. This results in a heterogeneous but structured linguistic system. A foundational working principle is that the structure — grammatical and social — underlying the
heterogeneity can be inferred from the distribution and conditioning of competing variants in discourse.Poplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 399
4.2. Communities and speakers
We noted above that change proceeds from diffusion, and extent of diffusion can only
be assessed in reference to a community of speakers. A crucial step, though often neglected, is to locate an appropriate (here, bilingual) community in which to carry out the
study. The nature and makeup of the community allow us to test hypotheses about the
extra-linguistic factors often claimed to be relevant to contact-induced change. These
include intensity of contact (the more intense, the greater the likelihood of structural
interference), length ofcontact (the greater the time-depth, the greater the likelihood of
change), status of the languages in the community (minority or majority) and sice of
speaker population (the fewer and more marginal the speakers, the more likely that they
will borrow from the language of the dominant group) (e.g., Romaine 1995; Thomason
2001; Winford 2003). Study sites can be selected to represent these parameters and to
test whether these factors are or are not operating.
Speakers constituting these communities can be sampled to represent individual dimensions of the contact axis. Sampling protocols are also guided by hypotheses about
how contact-induced change works. According to one, individual level of bilingualism
is inversely correlated with mastery of the minority-language grammar, such that the
greater the proficiency in the other language, the more likely the possibility of simplification or loss of minority-language linguistic structure. Another proposes that the incorporation on the local level of majority-language material (via code-switching or borrowing)
into otherwise minority-language discourse may bring with it associated grammatical
properties, and these in turn may lead to structural convergence (e.g., Backus 2005; King
2005; Muysken 2000; Thomason 2001; Winford 2003). According to this hypothesis, a
speaker’s individual propensity to code-switch would be a predictor of contact-induced
change. Individual attitudes toward, and relative prestige of, each of the languages could
also affect the extent and direction of change (e.g., Appel and Muysken 1987: 158; Joseph
2007; Romaine 1995: 66; Thomason 2001).
The case studies in section 5 demonstrate how these and other hypotheses can be
tested on linguistic production data provided by speakers representing different combinations of these conditions, thus enabling us to ascertain which are most explanatory of
contact-induced change and which community members are most likely to lead it.
4.3. Sampling bilingual speech
Once the appropriate speakers have been identified, we can record samples of their
spontaneous speech (bilingual and monolingual) in quantities sufficient to permit accountable analysis. The speech of choice for such an endeavor is the vernacular. Not only
does the vernacular offer “the most systematic data for linguistic analysis" (Labov 1984:
29), it is also the register in which linguistic manifestations of language contact are most
likely to occur. Variationists mine vernacular corpora to uncover the regular patterns
that characterize natural exchanges in the speech community and to distinguish them
from isolated or idiosyncratic occurrences. A pattern may be defined as “a series of
parallel occurrences (established according to structural and/or functional criteria) occurPoplack & Levey 2010
400 IV, Structure and dynamics across language spaces
ring at a non-negligiblc rate of use” (Poplack and Meechan 1998: 129). Patterns can
only be discerned by systematic quantitative analysis of the data in accordance with the
principle of accountability (Labov 1972b: 72) . This requires not only that all the relevant
occurrences of a feature be incorporated into the analysis, but additionally all the
contexts in which it could have occurred but did not. Adherence to the principle of
accountability allows the analyst to identify anomalous occurrences which arc neither
representative nor recurrent (and thus unlikely to trigger change), while identifying regular tendencies, which may (or may not) herald change.
4.4. Variable rule analysis
Certain linguistic and extra-linguistic conditions can be expected to promote change,
though none is fully determinant. Claims that even favorable linguistic factors can be
overridden by the right constellation of social factors (e.g., Thomason 2001: 77; Winford
2003: 25) raise the issue of the relative weights each contributes to a particular outcome
and the relationship of such weights to different types of contact situations. This is a
problem that lends itself well to multivariate analysis, the major analytical tool in the
variationist framework. Variable rule analysis (Rand and Sankoff 1990; Sankoff, Tagliamonte and Smith 2005) facilitates extraction of regularities from the welter of data making up running discourse. The multiple regression procedure incorporated within it helps
determine which aspects of the linguistic (e.g., phonological, morphological, syntactic,
etc.) and extra-linguistic (e.g., minority status, bilingual ability, age, etc.) contexts contribute statistically significant effects to variant choice when all are considered simultaneously (e.g., Sankoff 1988b). These aspects are hypotheses about the structure of variant
choice. Variable rule analysis enables us to operationalize them (as factors) and determine which give the best account of the data. The goals are to ascertain whether change
has taken place and if so, whether it is the product of contact or internal development.
Much empirical work on contact-induced change in progress revolves around frequencies. detailed by Poplack and Tagliamontc (2001: 92), however, differences in
rates of variant selection must be used with caution to infer change, contact-induced or
otherwise. The key diagnostic in assessing the relationship and provenance of forms is
the constraint hierarchy, the configuration of environmental factors affecting the probability that a given variant form will be selected, along with the direction of their effects.
We construe these as a portion of the grammar underlying the variability. To the extent
that constraint hierarchies are language-specific, they are powerful indicators of change
(see section 5).
Similarities in surface form in contact and source varieties can be misleading. They
may result from borrowing or transfer, justifying the inference of change, but may also
be due to interlingual coincidence or to linguistic universals. To rule out alternative
explanations, we rely on conflict sites (Poplack and Meechan 1998: 132): functional,
structural and/or quantitative differences, typically manifested as a conflict in constraint
hierarchies. The conflict site, together with detailed cross-variety comparison, plays a
crucial role in detecting change and identifying its ultimate provenance. If the hierarchy
of constraints conditioning the variable occurrence of a candidate for change (e.g., 0
subjunctive, overt subject pronoun, preposition stranding, null relative marker, pcrinhraslic future) in a contact variety is the same as that of its pre-contact precursor, whilePoplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 401
differing from that of its presumed source, no structural change has taken place. If it
features a constraint hierarchy different from those of both its prc-contact precursor and
the presumed source, we can infer that change has occurred, but not one that is contactinduced. Only when a candidate for change in a contact variety features a constraint
hierarchy different from that of its pre-contact precursor, but parallel to that of its presumed source, can we conclude in favor of contact-induced change.
4.5. Cross-variety comparison
Comparisons are at the heart of inferring change, and as such, figure, at least implicitly,
in all studies of contact-induced change. But many have been carried out without reference to the principle of accountability, or involve an idealized comparison variety. Still
others are simply anecdotal. Innovative in the research program we describe here is the
extent of the scientific apparatus brought to bear on the comparison. The comparative
variationist enterprise (Poplack and Meechan 1998; Poplack and Tagliamonte 2001; Tagliamonte 2002) contributes not only a methodological aspect — the construction, statistical analysis and linguistic interpretation of suitable comparison varieties (pre-contact,
non-contact and post-contact), but also the critical capacity to decide among competing
hypotheses. The focus is on identifying empirical criteria capable of both detecting
change and ascertaining its source, and testing hypotheses empirically to determine the
goodness of fit with the data. This involves principled data collection, enunciation and
operationalization of hypotheses and their statistical evaluation in large-scale corpora.
In section 5, we illustrate this approach by considering a number of case studies which
attest to the versatility of quantitative variationist methodology for identifying contactinduced change.
5. Putting contact-induced change to the test
The studies we present below were carried out in a context of long-term intense contact
between French and English in Canada, a situation that meets all the criteria considered
favorable to structural convergence (e.g., Thomason and Kaufmann 1988; Winford 2003:
90). Depending on locality, each of the languages has a different official status: English
is the majority language in Ontario, while in Quebec, French assumes this role. This
configuration allows for comparison of each of the languages in minority and majority
guise. The 284 speakers involved in these studies arc distributed among these four conditions. Other characteristics relevant to the contact situation include density of contact
on the local level (as expressed by the ratio of anglophones to francophones in the
community), individual bilingual ability (as measured by a bilingual proficiency index
[Poplack 1989, Poplack, Walker and Malcolmson 2006]) and relative propensity to borrow or code-switch (as inferred by comparing individual rates of each across sample
members). Standard extra-linguistic factors like social class, education, etc. were also
taken into account. The inference of change over time was investigated by comparing
the speech of younger and older generations.Poplack & Levey 2010
402 IV. Structure and dynamics across language spaces
The linguistic data come from two massive corpora of spontaneous speech collected
from these speakers: the Ottawa-Hull French Corpus (Poplack 1989) and the Quebec
English Corpus (Poplack, Walker and Malcolmson 2006). The typological similarity of
French and English should render them particularly hospitable to contact-induced
change. In addition, superficially similar structures were deliberately targeted, as these
are considered to be prime candidates for grammatical convergence. Indeed, at least two
of the cases described below had been reported to result from this process.
5.1. Attrition of the subjunctive in Ottawa-Hull French
In the most straightforward case, we locate, in community speech, a linguistic feature
that is used differently from the way it is prescribed and determine which individuals
are deviating the most. If the difference is the result of change, and if that change is
contact-induced, its leaders should figure among the younger, the more bilingual and
those in most intense contact with the majority language. The French subjunctive is an
excellent candidate. It is (prescriptively) obligatory after the class of “subjunctive-selecting” main verbs, like falloir in example (1), but in Canadian French it has been found
to be variable ((1); Poplack 1990). (This and all ensuing examples are reproduced verbatim from audio recordings from one of the corpora described above. The codes in parentheses refer to corpus [QEC: Corpus of Quebec English’ , OH: Corpus of Ottawa-Hull
French], speaker and line number. The examples cited throughout this paper are instantiations of patterns that emerged from the large-scale quantitative analyses presented in
sections 5.1 —5.3)
(1) Fallait qu’ elle repond (ind) “oui, lu рейх faire trois pas de
Necessary (past) that she answer (ind) yes you can make three steps of
geant”.
giants
Fallait qu' elle reponda (subj) la phrase complete.
Necessary (past) that she answer (subj) the sentence complete.
‘She had to say “yes, you may take three giant steps”. She had to say the whole
sentence.’ (OH.025.2186)
Because the subjunctive is no longer used productively in English, the (variable) occurrence of the indicative in contexts like (1) is inferred to be a stage in the loss of this
form, a development which Laurier (1989) characterized as the result of contact.
Table 22.1 displays the results of a multivariate analysis of the extralinguistic factors
contributing to choice of subjunctive. In this and the ensuing tables, the higher the figure,
the greater the probability the “application” variant will be selected in the environment
listed on the left. Table 22.1 reveals a small, but statistically significant, tendency for the
most bilingual speakers to use least subjunctive. This result supports the hypothesis that
high levels of bilingualism lead to linguistic simplification and loss. Most studies would
stop at this demonstration (if they provided any quantitative information at all). But if
this is a contact-induced change, effects of the other factors should point in the same
direction. This not the case. Instead, the two French-majority-language communities in
Quebec. Vieux Hull and Mont Bleu, which should favor the subjunctive most under thisPoplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 403
Tab. 22.1: Variable rule analysis of the contribution of extralinguistic factors to the choice of subjunctive under verbal matrices
Corrected mean
Total N
0.715
2694
SEX
Female .52
Male .46
AGE
45-54 .55
55-64 .53
15-24 .52
25-34 .50
65 + .48
35-44 .44
NEIGHBOURHOOD OF RESIDENCE
Vieux Hull, Quebec (FR majority working class) .57
West End, Ontario (FR minority working class) .51
Vanier, Ontario (FR minority upper-working class) .50
Basse-Ville, Ontario (FR minority working class) .50
Mont Bleu, Quebec (FR majority upper-middle class) .43
ENGLISH PROFICIENCY
mid-low .54
low .53
mid-high .48 -
high .42
hypothesis, instead use most and least, depending on social class. (Working-class speakers, even more counter-intuitively, apparently use it the most.) Also militating against
the inference of change is the fact that the age distribution is not monotonic: the youngest speakers are as likely to select the subjunctive as their oldest counterparts. Further
analysis revealed that these apparent extra-linguistic effects are in fact epiphenomena of
a strong lexical effect (Poplack 1990, 1992: 2001). Subjunctive morphology is highly
associated with only a few main verbs, and because those verbs happened to be unevenly
distributed across the subgroups represented in Table 22.1, this showed up as a discrepTab. 22.2: Variable rule analysis of the contribution of English proficiency to the choice of subjunctive in verbs embedded under four classes of verbal matrix
English Proficiency
low mid-low mid-high high
VERBS EMBEDDED UNDER
high frequency/high subjunctive matrix verb:
falloir .55 .58 .40 .42
high frequency/high subjunctive matrix verbs:
vouloir1aimer .46 .58 .42 .60
low frequency/low subjunctive matrix verbs .68 .47 .49 .31
low frequency/variable subjunctive matrix verbs .34 .60 .61 .39Poplack & Levey 2010
404 IV. Structure anddynamics across language spaces
Tab. 22.3: Variable rule analysis of the contribution of socioeconomic class to the choice of subjunctive in verbs embedded under four classes of verbal matrix
Socioeconomic class
unskilled skilled sales/
service
professional
VERBS EMBEDDED UNDER
high frequency/high subjunctive matrix verb:
falloir .45 .53 .47 ; .69
high frequency/high subjunctive matrix verbs:
vouloir / aimer .36 .62 .64 .52
low frequency/low subjunctive matrix verbs
low frequency/variable subjunctive matrix
.56 .47 .42 iuL58T,-
verbs .50 .42 .42 5T5.68.U:
ancy in subjunctive usage. When the lexical identity of the main verb is factored out, as
in Table 22.2, bilingual proficiency no longer shows a systematic effect.
The real explanation for differential use of the subjunctive is class-based, and is not
relevant to the contact situation at all, as illustrated in Table 22.3 (see Poplack 1997 for
detail). This result could not have been intuited from casual comparisons with either the
idealized standard benchmark (which prescribes the subjunctive categorically), or
amongst proficiency groups. This is but one illustration of our earlier contention that
differences in overall rates of variant occurrence need not be indicative of change, contact-induced or otherwise. Indeed, real-time analysis over a time span of 120 years (StAmand and Poplack 2002) showed that the current situation of the subjunctive is actually a retention.
5.2. Preposition stranding in Ottawa-Hull French
It has been argued that a local factor, the extent to which individual speakers draw on
the two languages in discourse, is a better predictor of contact-induced change than
macro-level factors like minority status or density of contact. Under this hypothesis,
speakers who code-switch the most would lead contact-induced change (Backus 2005;
Bullock and Toribio 2004; King 2005; Thomason 2001; Winford 2003). Zentz (2006) was
the first to test this hypothesis empirically, using as a diagnostic the syntactic phenomenon of preposition stranding in Canadian French, as in (2).
(2) Сотте le gars qite je sors avec, lui il' parle- bien il est fran^ais
Like the guy that I go out with him he speaks- well he is French
‘Like the guy I’m going out with, he speaks- well he is French.’ (OH.013.2122)
Because preposition stranding is normatively proscribed, examples like (2) have been
ascribed to contact, if not convergence, with English (e.g., King 2000; Roberge and
Rosen 1999), in which stranding is presumed to occur freelv.Poplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 400
But the phenomenon of stranding cannot be fully understood in isolation from the
behavior of the remainder of the preposition system. In particular, French does admit
phrase-final prepositions in another, superficially similar, construction, known as orphaning (Zribi-Hertz 1984). This is illustrated in (3). In contrast to stranding, orphaning
is not admissible in English, as can be seen from the gloss of (3).
(3) Si in veu.x /’ avoir avant, il font tn payes pour.
If you want it to.have before it have you pay for
*‘If you want it before, you have to pay for.' (OH.013.258)
This raises the question of whether preposition stranding in French is an extension (to
relative clauses) of the native orphaning, or a change induced by contact with English.
Reasoning that if the latter were the case, and the above claims were correct, speakers
who code-switched frequently to that language should engage in more stranding, Zentz
(2006) contrasted the stranding behavior of “high" and “low” code-switchers.
Using constraint hierarchies to first determine and then compare the structure of the
choice mechanism, Zentz showed (Table 22.4) that the strongest predictor of preposition
orphaning in French is lexical.
“Strong” prepositions (a category made up, for the most part, of four: avec ‘with’,
pour ‘for’, dedans ‘in’, dessus ‘on’) favor orphaning, while “weak” prepositions (here, a
‘to’ and de ‘from’) disfavor it almost categorically. This, pattern, which is perfectly consistent with normative injunctions (Grevisse 1980: 1509), is shared by all speakers, regardless of propensity to code-switch, as can be seen by the parallel constraint hierarchies. In comparison, stranding, the candidate for change, not only occurs at the same
low rate as orphaning (approximately ten percent of all eligible contexts), but is constrained in the same way.
Here too, the most important conditioning factor is the lexical identity of the preposition. As with orphaning, stranding is also eschewed with weak prepositions and highly
promoted by strong prepositions. And the strong prepositions in question are precisely
those that favor orphaning. This effect is again as true of high as of low code-switchers.
Once stranding — the superficially English structure — is examined in the context of
the recipient-language system, three independent results counter the notion that it was
borrowed from English. Stranding occurs at the same (low) rate and more important,
obeys the same variable constraints as native orphaning. Like orphaning, stranding is
restricted to like orphaning, standing is basically restuded to the same four strong prepositions. In English, on the other hand, stranding would seem to be equally productive
with a wide variety of lexical prepositions, strong and weak. Finally, there is no distinction between high and low code-switchers, refuting claims that the former are agents of
contact-induced change (see also Torres-Cacoullos and Travis to appear).
The great merit of the Zentz study is that it marshals accountable scientific methodology to demonstrate that, contrary to appearances, a syntactic structure apparently identical to a counterpart in the majority language, and which is moreover (prescriptively)
proscribed in the minority language, is nonetheless unlikely to be a contact-induced
change. This is because the conditions giving rise to stranding in French parallel those
constraining native orphaning, while differing from those assumed to be operating in
English. The drawback of this study (and most others) is that it compares the situationPoplack & Levey 2010
406 IV, Structure and dynamics across language spaces
Tab. 22.4: Independent variable rule analyses of the contribution of linguistic factors to preposition
orphaning and stranding for low and high code-switchers (brackets indicate that the
factor was not statistically significant)
Orphaning Stranding
“Low”
Code-switchers
“High”
Code-switchers
“Low”
Code-switchers
“High”
Code-switchers
Corrected mean .09 .62 .01 .03
Total N 982 662 224 116
SYNTACTIC FACTORS
Place of topic
Discourse referent [ ] N/A N/A
Intra-sentential
referent [ ] [ ] N/A N/A
Type of construction
Cleft N/A N/A .35 [ ]
Object precedes
relative N/A N/A .40 [ ]
Pseudo-cleft N/A N/A .99 [ ]
Presence of another
complement
None [ J [ ]
Additional Post-V
complement [ 1 [ ] [ ] [ ]
Clitic [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ]
SEMANTIC FACTORS
Semantic content of
preposition
“Weak” 0 .19 .19 .19
“Strong” .96 .99 .95
Obligatoriness of preposition
Obligatory .42 [ ] [ ]
Non-obligatory .61 [ ] [ 1 [ ]
Humanness of noun
complement
Non-human .57 .46
Human .36 [ ] .82 [ ]
in the contact language with what is presumed to be the case in the source. Absent any
accountable study of preposition stranding in the contact variety of English, we cannot
be fully confident about exactly what was transferred. In additional, there is no evidence
(in this or other studies), that the current state of affairs represents a change. Demonstration of contact-induced change would minimally include a vertical comparison (preferably with a pre-contact stage, but at the very least with an earlier stage), a horizontal
comparison with a non-contact varietv and comparison with the structure of the source.Poplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 407
5.3. Relative marker expression in Quebec English
A study by Poplack et al. (2006) illustrates the unexpected results to emerge from such
an approach. It involves the variable use of overt and null relative markers in accusative
relative clauses in Quebec English, a minority language in intense contact with French.
This is illustrated in example (4). Quebec French shows the same (surface) alternation
in the same context (5).
(4) a. Isaid "Oh yeah, Iremember Iwas wearing this disgustingly ugly green suit that
you made me wear", or something. (QEC.031.1135)
b. I was always known as Carrot Head and Heckle Face and afew other very vulgar
names 0 they called me. (QEC.006.602)
(5) a. Bien je comprenais le jranfais, mais c est les mots que je comprenais
Well I understood the French but it is the words that 1 understood
pas.
not
‘Well, T understood the French, but it’s the words that I didn’t understand.’
(OH.059.812)
b. Les maisons 0 Us faisaient dans ce temps Ft le bois etait tresThe houses 0 they made in that time there the wood was veryil etait pas cher pantoute.
it was not expensive at all
‘The houses they made in those days, the wood was very- it wasn’t expensive at
all.’ (OH.050.698)
In particular, both languages permit a null variant (4b, 5b), although this is prescriptively
unacceptable in French. How is it generated? Table 22.5 displays the factors constraining
choice of null variant across mainstream varieties and cohorts of contact-variety
speakers.
A first important observation is that the structure of variable relative marker expression differs in the two non-contact varieties. In English (column 2), the strongest predictor of a null relative marker is the presence of intervening material between the subject
of the relative clause and its antecedent; in French (column 1), the major effect is phonological. Because these effects are language-specific, we can use them as diagnostics of
contact-induced change. We may now compare the contact variety to its non-contact
counterpart (columns 2 and 3).
For all factor groups, the constraint hierarchies are parallel. This means that, in the
aggregate, the contact variety of English is no different from its mainstream counterpart.
But according to the hypotheses enunciated earlier, certain subgroups of the population
could be expected to spearhead changes. So we will want to establish whether all of the
minority-language speakers behave in the same fashion, by comparing the conditioning
of variant choice according to speaker age and bilingual ability. Predictably, the behavior
of the older (column 5) and least bilingual (column 7) speakers is very similar to that of
speakers of noncontact English (column 2) in terms of constraint hierarchies. But the
younser (column 4) and more bilinsual sneakers (column 6) share less with the mainPoplack & Levey 2010
408 IV. Structure and dynamics across language spaces
Tab. 22.5: Independent variable rule analyses of the contribution of linguistic factors to the selection of the null relative marker: across mainstream varieties
I 2 3 4 6 7
Mainstream Mainstream Contact Younger Older Most Least
French English English speakers speakers bilingual
speakers
bilingual
speakers
Corrected ineai): .367 .532 .41)0 .502 .503 .563
Total N 50/460 109/288 150/281 131/316 128/253 75/146 75/135
Intervening material
None 1 ] S"> .54 .55 I ] .57 1 1
Present [ 1 .17 .24 .19 1 1 .14 1 ]
Antecedent type
Pronoun .71 .73 1 ] 1 ] .76 1 1 .89
Noun .44 .46 1 ] 1 1 .45 1 ] .42
Type of subject of the
relative clause
Pronoun 5”) .51 1 ] .53 1 ] .53
Noun 0 .28 .32 1 ] .15 1 ] .18
Following phonological environment
Sonorants .13 1 1 I ] .54 I ] 1 ] 1 ]
Obstruents .94 1 ] [ ] .36 [ ] 1 ] 1 ]
Definiteness of antecedent
Definite 1 1 1 ] 1 ] 1 ] .59 1 ] .60
Indefinite 1 1 I ] 1 1 1 1 .36 1 ] .31
Sentence type
Cleft .61 1 ] [ ] 1 1 1 1 1 ] 1 ]
Other .44 1 ] [ ] 1 ] 1 ] 1 1 1 ]
stream in terms of the fine conditioning of variant choice. This kind of result is consistent
with their predicted role as leaders of change. Are these in fact changes? Comparison
with older speakers suggests that they are. But are they contact-induced? As we noted
earlier, to sustain any claim in this respect, the involvement of the source language (here,
French) must be established. The three major “departures" of the younger and more
bilingual cohorts with respect to their older and less bilingual counterparts involve the
effects of antecedent type, type of subject of the relative and following phonological
environment. The first two effects have been neutralized in the younger generation, while
in French, as shown in column I, they arc strong and significant. The effect most relevant
to the contact situation is phonological. Recall that this is the major predictor of variant
choice in French, and the younger and most bilingual anglophones are the only ones
who display it. This result is consistent with the inference of contact-induced change.
But comparison of constraint hierarchies shows that the French effect goes in the opposite direction. (The apparent English phonological effect is an epiphenomenon of a developing tendency for certain pronominal subjects which are coincidentally obstruent-initial
(he, she, they) to disfavor deletion.) Here again, differences among minority-language
cohorts, suggestive as they appear on the surface, cannot be attributed to convergencePoplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 409
Tab. 22.6: Independent variable rule analyses of the contribution of linguistic factors to the selection of the mill relative marker: younger contact vs. benchmark speakers
Younger contact
speakers
Younger mainstream
speakers
Corrected mean: .482 .299
Total N 83/168 48/148
Intervening material
None .56 .55
Present .18 .10
Antecedent type
Pronoun .76
Noun [ ] .45
Type of subject of the relative clause
Pronoun [ ]
Noun 1 ] [ ]
Following phonological environment
Sonorants [■53] [-54]
Obstruents [-38] [-34]
Definiteness of antecedent
Definite .59 [ ]
Indefinite .40 [ ]
with French. To what then are they due? Comparison with the non-contact benchmark
provides the answer (Table 22.6). When speakers of mainstream English are analyzed
according to age, we find the same apparent changes in progress.
In this case our method has enabled us to detect change — the young minoritylanguage anglophones are diverging from their elders (column 5 of Table 22.5) — and to
attribute it to the correct source: participation in a change in progress in mainstream
English.
These examples, along with many others (e.g., Dion 2003,'Jarmasz 2005; Leroux and
Jarmasz 2006; Petrik 2005; Poplack and St-Amand 2007; St-Amand 2002) demonstrate
that when the inference of contact-induced change is pursued systematically, it becomes
increasingly difficult tojustify. Particularly instructive is the fact that even in quantitative
studies, differences between cohorts or overall rates may be masking effects that are
independent of the contact situation.
6. Discussion
Change is widely considered a predictable, if not inevitable, outcome of language contact. The literature is rife with accounts of radical alterations of the grammars of contact
languages, whether by virtue of incorporating forms or functions with no antecedent in
the recipient language, or losing one or more of its core grammatical elements. Many of
these changes would appear to be very rapid, occurring even in the space of a singlePoplack & Levey 2010
410 IV. Structure and dynamics across language spaces
generation. This is consistent with another widespread, if unproven, idea: that contact
accelerates change. On both of these counts, contact-induced change appears suspiciously different from internal evolution, which we know to be gradual, moderate and
vastly more conservative.
Observing that scientific demonstration of change, contact-induced or other, was often
missing from this research, we reviewed some of the phenomena that could lead the
analyst down the garden path of inferring change, even where such an inference is not
warranted. Chief among them are the inherent variability characteristic of spontaneous
speech and the dearth of accountable corpus-based studies of the languages in contact.
When confronted with an idealized standard variety, but lacking systematic comparison
with the more relevant pre- and non-contact varieties, or with the supposed source variety of the claimed change, we detailed how the (variable) occurrence of non-standard
variants could easily be confused with change.
We also outlined a number of conditions necessary to establish the existence of contact-induced change. Many had already been enunciated elsewhere (Poplack 1993;
Poplack and Meechan 1998); some were recently reiterated (e.g., Backus 2005: 310). The
following are paraphrased from Thomason (2001: 93—94):
1. Situate the proposed change with respect to its host linguistic system
2. Identify a presumed source of the change
3. Locate structural features shared by the source and recipient languages
4. Prove that the proposed interference features were not present in the pre-contact
variety
5. Prove that the proposed interference features were present in the source variety prior
to contact
6. Rule out (or situate) internal motivations
Thomason herself concedes that “in many, possibly even most contact situations around
the world we cannot at present satisfy requirements 4 and 5”, going so far as to caution
that “if we can’t satisfy all the requirements, then we can’t make a solid case for contactinduced change” (Thomason 2001: 94). This raises the issue, which has preoccupied us
throughout this article, of just how many of the contact-induced changes currently
treated as facts satisfy any of these conditions, let alone all. This is a very important
question, since these “facts” arc the basis for our theories about the nature, extent and
mechanisms of contact-induced change.
We observed earlier that for many diachronic changes, the crucial evidence would
now be impossible to reconstruct. But as we have been at pains to illustrate, this is
certainly not the case for synchronic situations. It is thus all the more puzzling that the
requisite information is missing from all but a handful of contemporary studies. Why
should this be? The growing, but patently false, perception among linguists working in
other paradigms that it is too difficult, if not impossible, to access the relevant evidence
may play a role. The treatment of frequency is a case in point. Frequency is at the root
of most inferences of change, whether manifested as raw rates of occurrence of a form,
or its diffusion across a community or linguistic system. Among the few who have addressed this issue at all, a certain skepticism about the feasibility of ascertaining frequency empirically is detectible. 'Huis with reference to the appearance of foreign elements in bilingual speakers’ discourse, Thomason observes, “determining the frequency
of appearance is a hopeless task” (2001: 134), and goes on to query: “how can onePoplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 411
determine whether a speaker used [an element] once, occasionally or frequently?” Likewise, while Backus (2005) admits that most changes are likely of the “frequency-changing kind”, he contends that these are precisely the changes that “are virtually impossible
to demonstrate empirically” (2005: 334). Such assertions betray a surprising lack of familiarity with corpus-based studies, and fly in the face of the important results of largescale quantitative analyses that have been performed on languages in contact.
Despite recent concerns about the absence of an empirically well-founded framework
for investigating bilingual speech (Van Coetsem 2000: 39-40; Winford 2007: 22) and the
alleged limitations of variation-based techniques for illuminating contact phenomena
(Muysken 2000: 250), we submit that the rigorous comparative methodology presented
here is capable of detecting change and distinguishing external from internal motivations.
It thus discriminates among competing hypotheses about the nature of these processes.
Agreeing with Thomason (2001: 88) that the crucial similarity between the processes
of contact-induced and internal change has to do with competition (i.e. variability) between an innovative feature and an older feature, we have outlined a procedure for
assessing contact-induced change within a framework that takes account of its symbiotic
relationship with linguistic variation. We hope to have shown that reliance on the structure of variant choice affords a depth of analysis that transcends impressionistic observations based on perceived similarities between surface forms and rates of occurrence.
Indeed, the very strength of the variation-based approach resides in its capacity to
discern even minor perturbations in constraint hierarchies, which may be harbingers of
change, contact-induced or otherwise. Otheguy, Livert and Zentella (2007) provide the
most recent confirmation that it can detect even the smallest adjustments in constraint
ranking across generations of bilingual speakers.
Illustrating with studies of three well-documented candidates, we found no evidence
of change in the first two, and the change documented in the third was not contactinduced. Moreover, in line with Thomason’s (2001: 91-92) caveat that a “case for contact origin can’t be made on the basis of single feature”, additional research situating a
wide variety of Canadian French and English vernacular variants in historical, social
and linguistic context corroborates the findings presented here: none of the contemporary non-standard variants typically ascribed to either linguistic change or language contact are in fact innovations (Poplack and Dion to appear; Elsig and Poplack 2006; Jarmasz 2005; Leroux 2007; Poplack 1993). Rather, virtually all were not only present in the
pre-contact variety, but, more important, they were largely constrained in the same way.
These results are especially striking when we consider that all the popularly invoked
prerequisites for contact-induced change — social (protracted contact, extensive bilingualism; high levels of proficiency in the respective source languages, etc.) and linguistic
(i. e. typological congruence [Thomason 2001: 71], interlingual equivalence [Backus 2005:
326]; grammatical “weak points” [Bullock and Toribio 2004: 91], attractiveness [Johanson 2002: 2]) — are met.
Why then did contact-induced change fail to occur? Given the present state of our
knowledge, we can only speculate. The length of contact may have been too brief to
result in change, although a time span of two centuries is a good deal longer than those
on which many recent claims have been based. Perhaps the morpho-syntactic features
we examined are particularly resistant to change, although they were specifically selected
on the basis of typological similarities thought to facilitate it. We cannot rule out the
possibility that our analytical tools may have misidentified or excluded changes; wcPoplack & Levey 2010
412 IV, Structure and dynamics across language spaces
reserve judgment until a demonstration to that effect is offered. Certainly the circumstances - linguistic, social and attitudinal - could not have been more propitious. But
while favorable circumstances may encourage change, we know that they do not determine it. A remaining possibility is that contact-induced change is a good deal less common than the literature suggests. This is our best guess at the moment.
Of course, the analyses we have presented, despite being based on corpora of bilingual speech with sizes ranging into the millions ofwords and large representative samples
of individuals in contact situations, cannot begin to do justice to the full trajectory of
change over time and across all speakers of a language. But opting for the alternative -
anecdotal observation - simply because “it is much easier to show a qualitative change"
(Backus 2005: 334) - ignores the important scientific advances in empirical linguistics
made over the last half century. Contact-induced change is not an inevitable, nor possibly
even a common, outcome of language contact. Only more accountable analyses of more
contact situations will tell. In the interim, the burden of proof is on those who claim
that it has occurred.
7. Acknowledgement
The research reported here was generously funded by grants to Poplack from the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and the Killam Foundation.
Poplack holds the Canada Research Chair in Linguistics at the University of Ottawa.
8. References
Aikhenvald, Alexandra
2002 Language contact in Amazonia. New York: Oxford University Press.
Altenberg, Evelyn P.
1991 Assessing first language vulnerability to attrition. In: Seliger and Vago (cds.), 189-206.
Appel, Rene and Pieter Muysken
1987 Language Contact and Bilingualism. London: Edward Arnold.
Ayres-Bennett, Wendy
2000 Voices from the past: Sources of spoken seventeenth-century French. Rornanische
Forschungen 112(3): 328-348.
Backus, Ad
2005 Codeswitching and language change: One thing leads to another'? International Journal
of Bilingualism 9(3/4): 307-340.
Baldi, Philip
1990 Introduction: The Comparative Method. In: Philip Baldi (ed.). Linguistic Change and
Reconstruction Methodology, 1-13. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bakker, Peter
1997 “Л Language of Our Own": The Genesis of Michif, the Mixed Cree-French Language of
the Canadian Metis. (Oxford Studies in Anthropological Linguistics 10.) Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Bakker, Peter and Robert A. Papcn
1997 Michif: A mixed language based on Cree and French. In: Sarah G. Thomason (ed.).
Contact Languages, 295-363. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.Poplack & Levey 2010
22, Contact-induced grammatical change 4 13
Bullock. Barbara E. and Almeida Jacqueline Toribio
2004 Introduction: Convergence as an emergent property in bilingual speech. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition 7(2): 91 —94.
Bynon. Theodora
1977 Historical Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Campbell. Lyle
1998 Historical Linguistics: An Introduction. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Campbell, Lyle
1999 Historical Linguistics: An Introduction. Cambridge. MA: MIT Press.
Campbell, Lyle
2 00.3 How to show languages are related: Methods Tor distant genetic relationship. In: Joseph
and Janda (eds.). 262-282.
Clyne. Michael
2003 Dynamics ofLanguage Contact. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Croft. William
2000 Explaining Language Change: An Evolutionary Approach. Harlow/New York: Longman.
Dawkins. Richard MacGillivray
1916 Modern Creek in Asia Minor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dion, Nathalie
2003 L’elTacement du qtte cn franpais canadien: Une etude en temps reel. Unpublished MA
thesis (tnemoire). Department of Linguistics, University of Ottawa.
Dorian, Nancy C.
I 981 Language Death: The Life Cycle qfa Scottish Gaelic Dialect. Philadelphia, PA: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Dorian, Nancy C. (ed.)
1989 Investigating Obsolescence: Studies in Language Contraction and Death. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dorian, Nancy
1993 Internally and externally motivated change in language contact settings: Doubts about
dichotomy. In: Charles Jones (ed.). Historical Linguistics. Problems and Perspectives,
131-154. London: Longman.
Elsig, Martin and Shana Poplack
2006 Transplanted dialects and language change: Question formation in Quebec. University of
Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 10(2): 77—90. [Selected Papers from NWAC
Jd.]
Field. Frederic
2005 Long-term effects of CS: Clues to structural borrowing. International Journalof Bilingualism 9(3/4): 341 -360.
Gal, Susan
1979 Language Shift: Social Determinants ofLinguistic Change in Bilingual Austria. New York:
Academic Press.
Garcia, Erica C.
1985 Shifting variation. Lingua 67: 189-224.
Gordon, Elizabeth M., Lyle Campbell, Jennifer Hay, Margaret Maclagan, Andrea Sudbury and
Peter Trudgill
2004 New Zealand English: Its Origins and Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Grevisse, Maurice
1980 Le Bon Usage. Duculot: Paris.
Gumpcrz, John J. and Robert Wilson
1971 Convergence and creolization: A case from the Indo-Aryan/Dravidian border. In: Dell
Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and Creolization of Languages. 151 — 167. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Poplack & Levey 2010
414 IV. Structure and dynamics across language spaces
Gutierrez, Manuel
1994 Simplification, transfer and convergence in Chicano Spanish. The Bilingual ReviewlLa
Revista Bilingiie: 19: 11 I - 121.
Harris. Alice C. and Lyle Campbell
1995 Historical Syntax in Cross-Linguistic Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Haugen, Einar
1954 Review of Wcinreich (1953). Language 30: 380-388.
Heine, Bernd and Tania Kuteva
2005 Language Contact and Grammatical Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hoenigswald, Henry
I960 Language Change and Linguistic Reconstruction. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Huffines, Marion Lois
1991 Pennsylvania German: Convergence and change as strategies ofdiscourse. In: Seliger and
Vago (eds.). 125-137.
Jakobson, Roman
1962 Sur la theorie des affinites phonologiqucs entre des langues. In: Stephen Rudy (ed.).
Roman Jakobson: Selected Writings, vol. 1, 234-246. The Hague: Mouton.
Jarmasz, Lidia-Gabriela
2005 “I think I know what I’m thinking”: The alternation between simple and progressive
forms in stative verbs. Unpublished MA thesis (nietnoire), Department of Linguistics.
University of Ottawa.
Johanson, Lars
2002 Structural Factors in Turkic Language Contact. London: Curzon.
Joseph, Brian D.
2007 Attitudes and ideology in contact-induced change: Trumping all psychological and structural factors. Paper presented at the 18th International Conference on Historical Linguistics (1CHL). Universite du Quebec a Montreal, August.
Joseph, Brian D. and Richard D. Janda (eds.)
2003 The Handbook of Historical Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kaufman, Dorit and Mark Aronoff
1991 Morphological disintegration and reconstruction. In: Seliger and Vago (eds.), 175-188.
King, Ruth
2000 The Lexical Basis ofGrammatical Borrowing. Philadelphia/Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
King, Ruth
2005 Crossing grammatical borders: Tracing the path of contact-induced linguistic change. In:
Markku Filppula, Juhani Klemola, Marjatta Palander and Esa Pentilla (eds.). Dialects
Across Borders: Selected Papers from the 11 th International Conference on Methods in
Dialectology (Methods XI), Joensuu, August 2002. 233-251. Amsterdam/Philadelphia:
.John Benjamins.
Klein, Flora
1980 A quantitative study of syntactic and pragmatic indications of change in the Spanish of
bilinguals in the U.S. In: William Labov (ed.). Locating Language in Time and Space.
69-82. New York: Academic Press.
Labov, William
[1966] 1982 The Social Stratification of English in Hew York City. Washington: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, William
1969 Contraction, deletion and inherent variability of the English copula. Language 45(4):
715-762.
Labov, William
1972a Language in the Inner Cite. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.Poplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 415
Labov, William
1972b Sociolinguistic Ранета. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov. William
1984 Field methods of the project on language change and variation. In: John Baugh and Joel
Schezer (eds.). Language in Use, 28-53. Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall.
Labov. William
1994 Principles of Linguistic Change: Internal Factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov. William. Paul Cohen, Clarence Robins and John Lewis
1968 A study of the non-standard English of Negro and Puerto Rican speakers in New York
City. Final report, Co-operative Research Report ,3288. vol. I, US Regional Survey.
Lantolf, James
1978 The variable constraints on mood in Puerto Rican Spanish. In: Margarita Suner (cd.).
Contemporary Studies in Romance Linguistics. 19,3-217. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Lass. Roger 1980 On Explaining Language Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Laurier. Michel
1989 Le subjonctif dans lc parlor franco-ontarien: Un mode en voie de disparition? In: Raymon
Mougeon and Edouard Beniak (eds.), Le Fran/Sais Canadien Parle Hors Quebec: Aperqu
Sociolinguistique, 105-126. Quebec: Presses de J’Universite Laval.
Lehmann, Winfred 13
1992 Historical Linguistics. 3rd ed. London/New York: Routledge.
Leroux, Martine
200,3 Le passe recompose: Analyse diachronique et multivariee de la valeur temporelle du passe
en franpais oral de Hull (Quebec). Unpublished MA thesis (memoire). Department of
Linguistics, University of Ottawa.
Leroux, Martine
2007 Something old, something new, something borrowed, something true: What are null subjects in French? Paper presented at New Ways of Analyzing Variation ,36, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, October.
Leroux, Martine and Lidia-Gabriela Jarmasz
2006 A study about nothing: Null subjects as a diagnostic of convergence between English and
French. University ofPennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 12(2): 1-14.
Martineau, France and Raymond Mougeon
200,3 A sociolinguistic study of the origins of ne deletion in European and Quebec French.
Language 79(1): 11 8 — 152.
Martinet. Andre
I960 Elements de Linguistique Generale. Paris: Colin.
Mcillet. Antoine
1967 The Comparative Method in Historical Linguistics. Paris: Librairie Honore Champion.
Milroy, .James
1992 Linguistic Variation and Change: On the Historical Sociolinguistics of English. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Milroy. James
199,3 On the social origins of language change. In: Charles Jones (cd.). Historical Linguistics:
Problems and Perspectives, 215-2,36. London: Longman.
Montrul. Silvana
2002 Incomplete acquisition and attrition of Spanish tense/aspect distinctions in adult bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 5: 39—68.
Mougeon, Raymond and Edouard Beniak
1991 Linguistic Consequences of Language Contact and Restriction: The case of French in Ontario. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Poplack & Levey 2010
416 IV. Structure and dynamics across language spaces
Mougeon. Raymond. Terry Nadasdi and Katherine Reluier
2005 Contact-induced linguistic innovations on the continuum of language use: The case of
French in Ontario. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 8 (2): 99—115.
Midler. Max
1871 Lectures on the Science of Language. 1st ed. New York: Scribner
Muyskcn. Pieter
2000 Bilingual Speech: A Typology of Code-Mixing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ocampo. Francisco
1990 The pragmatics of word order in constructions with a verb and a subject. Hispanic Linguistics 4(1): 87-127.
Otheguy. Ricardo. Ana Celia Zentella and David Livert
2007 Language and dialect contact in Spanish in New York: Towards the formation of a speech
community. Language 83: 1 -33.
Pctrik. Katrina
2005 Deontic modality in Quebec English: “Everything you need to know". Unpublished MA
thesis (memoire). Department of Linguistics, University of Ottawa.
Poplack. Shana
1983 Bilingual competence: Linguistic interference or grammatical integrity? Tn: Lucia EliasOlivares (ed.), Spanish in the CS Setting: Beyond the Southwest, 107—131. Arlington:
National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education.
Poplack, Shana
1989 The care and handling of a mega-corpus. Tn: Ralph Fasold and Deborah Schiffrin (eds.).
Language Change and Variation, 411-451. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Poplack, Shana
1990 Prescription, intuition et usage: le subjonctif franpais et la variabilitc inherente. Langage
et Societe 54: 5-33.
Poplack. Shana
1992 The inherent variability of the French subjunctive. In: Christiane Laufer and Terrell Morgan (eds.). Theoretical Analyses in Romance Linguistics. 235-263. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Poplack, Shana
1993 Variation theory and language contact. In: Dennis Preston (ed.) American Dialect Research: An Anthology Celebrating the l()()lh Anniversary of the American Dialect Society,
251-286. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Poplack. Shana
1997 The sociolinguistic dynamics of apparent convergence. Tn: Gregory Guy. John Baugh
and Deborah Schiffrin (ed.s.). Towards a Social Science of Language, 285-309. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Poplack. Shana
2001 Variability, frequency and productivity in the irrealis domain of French. In: Joan Bybee
and Paul Hopper (eds.). Frequency and the Emergence of Linguistic Structure. 405-428.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Poplack, Shana
2003 Language contact and the evolution of French. Paper presented at Linguistic Symposium
on the Romance Languages (LSRL) 33 and Conference on French in North America.
Indiana University, Bloomington. April.
Poplack. Shana and Nathalie Dion
to appear “Prescription versus praxis: The evolution of future temporal reference in French”.
Language.
Poplack. Shana. Nathalie Dion, Lidia-Gabriela Jarmasz, Carmen LeBlanc and Nicole Rosen
2002 Repertoire LIistorique des Grcmrniaires du Francois. Corpus and documentation. Sociolinguistics Laboratory. University of Ottawa.Poplack & Levey 2010
22. Contact-induced grammatical change 4 I 7
Poplack. Shana, Adrienne Jones, Allison V. Lealess. Martine Leroux. Chelsea T. Smith. Yukiko
Yoshizumi. Lauren Zentz and Nathalie Dion
2006 Assessing convergence in contact languages. Paper presented at New Ways of Analyzing
Variation 35. The Ohio State University. Columbus. November.
Poplack. Shana and Elisabcte Malvar
2007 Elucidating the transition period in linguistic change. Probus I9(l): I2I - 169.
Poplack. Shana andMarjory Meechan
1998 How languages fit together in code-mixing. Special issue of the International Journal of
Bilingualism 2(2): Instant Loans. Easy Conditions: the Productivity ofBilingual Borrowing.
127-138.
Poplack. Shana and Anne St-^nand
2007 A real-time window on 19th century vernacular French: The Rc-eils dufranyais i/uehecois
dautrefois. Language in Society 36(5): 707-734.
Poplack. Shana and Sali Tagliamontc
2001 African American English in the Diaspora. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Poplack. Shana. James Walker and Rebecca Malcolmson
2006 An English “like no other”'?: Language contact and change in Quebec. Canadian Journal
ofLinguistics. 51(2/3): 185-213.
Rand. David and David SankotT
1990 Goldvarh 2.1: A variable rule application for the Macintosh. Montreal. Centre de Recherches Mathematiques, University of Montreal. Version 2. http://www.crm.umontreal.
caZ~sankofl7GoldVarb_Eng.html.
Ringe. Don
2003 Internal reconstruction. In: Brian D. Joseph and Richard D. Janda (eds.), The Handbook
of Historical Linguistics, 244-261. Oxford: Blackwell.
Roberge, Yves and Nicole Rosen
1999 Preposition stranding and г/г/c-deletion in varieties of North-^nerican French. Linguistics
Atlantica 21: 153-168.
Romaine. Suzanne
1988 Pidgin and Creole Languages. London: Longman.
Romaine, Suzanne
1995 Bilingualism. 2nd ed. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
SankolT. David
1988a Sociolinguistics and syntactic variation. In: Frederick J. Newmeyer (ed.). Linguistics: The
Cambridge Surve.I’, vol. 4, Language: The Socio-Cultural Context, 140-161. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
SankolF. David
1988b Variable rules. In: Ulrich Ammon, Norbert Dittmarand Klaus J. Mattheier (eds.). Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society, vol. 1.
984-997. (Handbiichcr zur Sprach- und Komunikationswissenschaft 3.1.) Berlin: de
Gruyter.
SankolF. David. Sali Tagliamonte and Eric Smith
2005 Goldvarh X: A Variable Rule Application for Macintosh and Windows. Toronto: Department of Linguistics. University of Toronto.
Savic, Jelena M.
1995 Structural convergence and language change: Evidence from Scrbian/English codeswitching. Language in Society 24(4): 475-492.
Schmidt, Annette
1991 Language attrition in Botimaa Fijian and Dyirbal. In: Seliger and Vago (eds.), 112-124.
Schuchardt. Hugo
1 884 Slawo-deutc/tes mid Slawo-ilalienisc/ies. Graz: Leuschncr und Lubenskv.Poplack & Levey 2010
418 IV. Structure and dynamics across language spaces
Seliger, Herbert and Robert M. Vago (eds.)
1991 First Language Attrition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shapiro. Michael
1995 A case of distant assimilation: /str/ -> /Jtr/. American Speech 70: 101 - 107.
Silva-Corvalan. Carmen
1991 Spanish language attrition in a contact situation with English. In: Seliger and Vago (eds.).
151-171.
Silva-Corvalan, Carmen
1994a Language Contact and Change. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Silva-Corvalan, Carmen
1994b The gradual loss of mood distinctions in Los Angeles Spanish. Language Variation and
Change 6(3): 255-272.
St-^nand, Anne
2002 Le subjonctif suivant tine expression non-verbale. Unpublished MA thesis (memoire).
Department of Linguistics. University of Ottawa.
St-Amand. Anne and Shana Poplack
2002 A real-time window on 19th century vernacular French: The Reeils dufranyais quebecois
d'autrefois. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Canadian Linguistics Association, University of Toronto, Toronto.
Tagliamonte, Sali
2002 Comparative sociolinguistics. In: Jack Chambers, Peter Trudgill and Natalie SchillingEstes (eds.). Handbook of Language Variation and Change, 729-76.3. Malden/Oxford:
Blackwell.
Thomason, Sarah G.
2001 Language Contact: An Introduction. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Thomason, Sarah G.
2007 Language contact and deliberate change. Journal of Language Contact 1: 41-62.
Thomason, Sarah G. and Terrence Kaufman
1988 Language Contact, Creolization. and Genetic Linguistics. Bcrkeley/Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Torres-Cacoullos, Rena and Catherine E. Travis
to appear Variable yo expression in New Mexico: English influence? In: Susana V. Rivera-Mills
and Daniel J. Villa (eds.), Spanish of the Southwest: A Language in Transition. Madrid:
Iberoamericana/Vervuert.
Toribio, Almeida Jacqueline
2004 Convergence as an optimization strategy in bilingual speech: Evidence from cocleswitching. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 7(2): 165—173.
Van Coetsem, Frans
2000 A General and Unified Theory of the Transmission Process in Language Contact. Heidelberg: Winter.
Weinrcich, Uriel, William Labov and Marvin Herzog
1968 Empirical foundations for a theory of language change. In: Winfred P. Lehmann and
Yakov Malkiel (eds.). Directions for Historical Linguistics. 97- 195. Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Whitney. William Dwight
1881 On mixture in language. Transactionsofthe American Philosophical Association 12: 1 -26.
Willis. Lauren
2000 Eire ou neplusetre: Auxiliary alternation in Ottawa-Hull French. Unpublished MA thesis
(memoire). Department of Linguistics, University of Ottawa.
Winford. Donald
2003 An Introduction to Contact Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell.Poplack & Levey 2010
23. Areal language typology 419
Winford. Donald
2007 Some issues in the study of language contact. Journal of Language Contad-Thema I
(2007). Available online from <http://www.jlc-joumal.org>.
Zentz. Lauren
2006 “C’est pa jc travaille dessus": Orphaned prepositions and relativization in Canadian
French. Unpublished MA thesis Onentoire). Department of Linguistics. University of Ottawa.
Zribi-Hertz, Anne
1984 Orphan Prepositions in French and the Concept of "Null Pronoun". Indiana University
Linguistics Club: Bloomington. IN.
Zwicky. A.
2005 More illusions. Available at <http://itrc.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/002407.
html>. Accessed 29 April 2008.
Shanti Poplack and Stephen Levey, Ottawa (Canada)
23. Areal language typology
1. Introduction: Setting the stage
2. Language typology
3. Language change: The social and linguistic dynamics of contact-induced convergence
and areality
4. Consequences for Linguistic Typology and its generalizations
5. Conclusion and outlook
6. References
1. Introduction: Setting the stage
Linguistic typology deals with linguistic variation and the discovery of cross-linguistic
universal patterns reflected in that variation. The aim of the present article is to show
that the robustness and the reliability of typological generalizations crucially depends on
the appropriate assessment of areality, i.e., the influence of geographic closeness and
language contact on structural properties of languages. Thus, the analysis of structures
and their overall statistical distribution in the population of the world’s languages does
not guarantee any direct access to valid generalizations about language universals and
about properties of the human cognition.
This can be illustrated by an example from basic word order. In his 1986 volume,
Tomlin looked at the overall percentage of the six logically possible combinations of S
(Subject), О (Object) and V (Verb) in a statistically balanced sample of 402 languages.
As it turned out, the majority of these languages were either SOV (180 languages, 44.78
percent) or SVO (168 languages, 41.79 percent). Only 37 languages (9.20 percent) were
VSO. The sequences in which О preceded S were only represented by a small minority
of twelve lansuases (2.99 oercent) with VOS. five laneuaees in the Amazonian resi on оf
/lew publication
